CHAPTER 2.  INSTALL F-PC




2.1.    THE ZIP FILES
 

F-PC is distributed on four 360K 5.25" MS-DOS DSDD diskettes or one 1.2M
quad density diskette.  The first diskette of the DSDD disk set contains
the installation instructions and the main body of F-PC execution files.
The second disk contains mostly the source code of F-PC.  The third disk
contains documentation and help files, with some utilities.  The last
disk contains the zip utility from PKware.  The file names and statistics
are summarized in Appendix C1.

We will be using the PKUNZIP program to restore all the .ZIP files back
to their original form. The PKZIP.EXE is the zip utility which you can
use to compress your files.  The PKZ101.EXE file, when executed will
produce PKZIP.EXE, PKUNZIP.EXE and the complete documentation on the zip
utilities.  The zip utility is provided by PKWARE, Inc. as a shareware
product. PKWARE, Inc. requires that the entire package be distributed
with applications.  This is the reason why PKZ101.EXE is included in
F-PC.

F-PC 2.25 was distributed in .ARC form.  The arc utility was also
produced by PKWARE. However, the zip utility is adopted here because it
has better compression efficiency than the arc utility.  You should be
aware that the zip utility is not public domain program.  If you find it
is useful, please register with PKWARE, Inc.  Send $47 to PKWARE and you
will receive, when available, the next version of the PKZIP, PKUNZIP, and
PKSFX programs. Please state the version of the software that you
currently have.  Send check or money order to:   PKWARE, Inc. 7545 N.
Port Washington Rd, Glendale, WI 53217.

The command syntax to unzip a zip file is:

         PKUNZIP [options] zipfile [d:outpath\] [file...]

Options are:
        -c[m]               extract to screen [with more]
         -d                 create directories stored in ZIP
        -h                  display this help message
        -j<H,S,R>           mask off Hidden/System/Readonly attributes
                            upon extraction
        -J<H,S,R>           don't mask off Hidden/System/Readonly attributes
        -l                  display software license
        -n                  extract only newer files
        -o                  overwrite existing files
        -p[a,b,c][1,2,3]    extract to printer [Asc mode,Bin mode,Com port]
                            [port #]
        -q                  enable ANSI in comments
        -s<pwd>             unScramble with password
        -t                  test zipfile integrity
        -v[b,c,d,e,n,p,s,r] view ZIP(s) [Brief listing/sort by Crc/Date/Ext
                            /Name/Percentage/Size/sort Reverse (descending)
                            order]

        zipfile             ZIP file name, wildcards *,? ok.  Default
                            extension is .ZIP file
        Name(s) of files to extract. Wildcards *,? ok. Default is ALL files.
        Unzip all .ZIP files on Drive A: to directory C:\FPC\SRC is:

        PKUNZIP  A:*.ZIP  C:\FPC\SRC

If you forget the options you want to use, type the following to get the
above option list:

        PKUNZIP -h

An interesting unzip command is:

        PKUNZIP -v  A:*.ZIP

which lists all the zipped files on the monitor, with file statistics and
checksums.  Appendix C2-C5 shows the lists of all zipped files in F-PC.
You can compare your file lists against them to verify the integrity of
your F-PC system.


2.2.    INSTALL F-PC USING INSTALL.EXE


F-PC includes an installation program INSTALL.EXE.  It creates
directories and expands .ZIP files onto your hard disk. This process
takes only a few minutes, and will consume about 2 megabytes if all
portions of F-PC are installed. After installation completes, the program
proceeds into the configuration section. You are asked questions about
your hardware. After which an installed copy of F-PC is created.

If the above process make you uncomfortable, or you just want to do the
installation yourself, proceed to the next section. Otherwise just type:

        A:INSTALL

The first thing INSTALL.EXE does is ask you whether you are installing
F-PC on your hard disk, or configuring a copy of F-PC already present on
your hard disk. To this question, you would answer "I" for Install, or
"C" for configure. The default is "I".  You can simply push the <return>
key to select the default choice.

Question two is where you want F-PC placed on your hard disk and its
directory.  The default is "C:\FPC".

Question three is where are you installing F-PC from, usually drive "A:".

At this point you are asked six (6) yes or no questions about what
portions of F-PC to install. You will need all the files if you are new
to F-PC.  Push <return> to make the default selections. However, after
you gain experience and confidence in using F-PC, you will not need the
help and text files, and you may eliminate these files by pushing "N" to
some of the questions.

Lastly you are prompted to insert F-PC disk number one, and press <enter>
to start the installation.  After the files on disk one is unzipped, you
will be asked to remove disk one and insert disk 2, etc.  Follow the
instructions and all the files needed will be unzipped and moved into the
appropriate directories on your hard disk.

After the files are copied, you will be asked several questions to
configure or customize F-PC to your computer environment, such as your
monitor, whether backup files are created automatically for editing, etc.
Detailed explanation to each question is displayed to guide your
selection.  At the end of the configuration session, a file "F.EXE" will
be created, which is the F-PC execution file you will use.  You can give
it a different name if you do care.


2.3.    INSTALL F-PC WITHOUT USING INSTALL.EXE


In this section you are assumed to be an experienced DOS user. If you are
not, then please go ahead and use INSTALL.EXE. The process is pretty
painless as INSTALL.EXE was designed to eliminate much of the problems in
adapting F-PC to a wide variety of PC's and their clones.  There are
occasions when INSTALL would fail to complete the installation process.
This section will help you to get a working F-PC system in this
unfortunate situation.

Unlike F-PC 2.25 and earlier versions, F-PC 3.5  has its own Forth PATH
command and several directories to hold its files. This keeps the clutter
down in the main FPC directory while keeping all the supporting files
available when needed. F-PC's directory structure looks like this:

        C:\ ----------- \FPC --------- \SRC
                                 |---- \HLP
                                 |---- \TOOLS
                                 |---- \NEWZ

You can of course put F-PC on a drive other than C:, and in directories
other than \FPC etc. but for this discussion we will assume you will be
using the above directory structure.

Create the above directory structure on your hard disk using the DOS
"MKDIR" (make directory) command.  Use PKUNZIP.EXE to "unzip" the .ZIP
files from floppy into the directories as shown below:

        Directory               .ZIP File

        \FPC                    FPC.ZIP
        \FPC\SRC                FPCSRC.ZIP
        \FPC\HLP                FPCDOC.ZIP
                                FPCHLP.ZIP
        \FPC\TOOLS              SAMPLES.ZIP
                                SMITH.ZIP
                                CURLEY.ZIP
                                ZIMMER.ZIP
        \FPC\NEWZ               NEWZ.ZIP

A typical PKUNZIP command line looks like this:

        C:> PKUNZIP A:FPC C:\FPC <Enter>

When you have finished the above, copy the following files from floppy to
the "\FPC" directory:

        README      FLOPPY.TXT      INSTALL.TXT     INSTALL.EXE

This completes installation, and leads us into configuration.


2.4.    CONFIGURE F-PC


F-PC uses a configuration file to execute several default configuration
commands. The F-PC.CFG file is automatically loaded each time you start
F-PC from the DOS command line. Part of the installation process is
creating a configuration file for your hardware environment. Since we are
doing the installation manually, we need to create this  configuration
file.

At the end of the installation process, you are asked questions above
your hardware configuration and some software preferences.  The
INSTALL.EXE then generates a F-PC.CFG file, which is loaded by F.EXE when
you invoke F-PC.  If you install the F-PC system yourself, you will still
have to create the F-PC.CFG file to let F-PC know the precise
configuration you have.  The easier way is to execute INSTALL.EXE again.
After the first question is displayed:

        Do you want to install F-PC on your hard disk, or
        Configure a copy of F-PC already on your hard disk [I/C]?  I

Type C instead of I followed by a <return>.  INSTALL.EXE will then bypass
the installation procedure and go directly to the configuration
procedure.  Answer the questions and the configuration file F-PC.CFG will
be created for you.

The following procedure will allow you to configure F-PC for your
hardware without using INSTALL.EXE. It is however much easier to
configure F-PC using the install program, so please use it if possible.

Using your favorite text editor, place the following lines in a file
named "F-PC.CFG".  If you have F-PC.EXE on the hard disk, you can use the
F-PC editor to create and edit this file.

        FPATH C:\FPC;C:\FPC\SRC;C:\FPC\HLP;C:\FPC\TOOLS
        FAST
        COLORIZEON
        BLANKOFF
        ' >COLOR IS INITCOLOR
        BACKUPON

When creating F-PC.CFG, if you installed F-PC on a hard drive other than
"C:", change each occurrence of "C:" following the FPATH command above to
the drive letter you are using.

The above words setup F-PC for a normal configuration. It will work even
if you have a monochrome system. The commands have the following meaning:

        FPATH C:\FPC;C:\FPC\SRC;C:\FPC\HLP;C:\FPC\TOOLS
                The Forth PATH tells F-PC which directories to search
                when you open or load a file. You can include other
                directories as well up to a maximum of 132 characters.

        FAST    Select direct video writes. The opposite option is "SLOW"
                DOS i/o.

        COLORIZEON      Use colors when displaying various Forth word
                classes. This is automatically disabled on Monochrome
                systems. The opposite option is "COLORIZEOFF".

        BLANKOFF        Don't blank the screen when writing to the
                display. If you have a CGA display you may want to use
                "BLANKON", all other displays use BLANKOFF.

        ' >COLOR IS INITCOLOR           Allows F-PC to support a color
                monitor if one is available. Will support monochrome even
                with this command included.

        BACKUPON  Keep a single backup file for each file edited. If you
                are very short on disk space, or are using F-PC on a
                floppy system, you may want to use "BACKUPOFF".

For all the options or preferences that you might choose, consult Section
9.4.  In the hypertext root screen, there is a 'Preference' link.  You
can browse from there to look at all the options.

After the configuration file is saved to disk, issue the following
command from the DOS prompt while in the "\FPC" directory:

      C:> F-PC - FSAVE F BYE <Enter>

This command will start F-PC, which automatically reads in the
configuration file we just created. The "-" above signifies no other file
is to be opened. The next two words "FSAVE F", save F-PC to disk with the
new name "F.EXE". You can of course use a name other than "F". "BYE"
leaves F-PC and returns to DOS. This process creates a fully configured
copy of F-PC called F.EXE that contains all of the default configuration
parameters you specified.

Be sure to include the "C:\FPC" directory in your system PATH command in
AUTOEXEC.BAT.

After rebooting your computer, you can run F-PC from any drive and
directory by typing "F <filename> <enter>", and Forth will be able to
find its source files, help files, and tools from wherever you are.


2.5.    INSTALL F-PC ON A DUAL FLOPPY SYSTEM


If you are trying to install F-PC on a dual floppy system, then you will
encounter some problems. When you are asked what to install while in the
installation program, you will only be able to install the program, not
the sources, help, or other things onto a 360k floppy. Therefore respond
"Y" to only the first question (program), and "N" to the following
questions.  After installation of the program section completes, enter "
A:;B: " for the Forth path question. Answer the rest of the configuration
questions about your hardware as you see fit.  The final question for the
name of Forth, must be set to "F-PC.EXE" which will overwrite the copy of
F-PC.EXE that was just installed on the floppy, as there is no room for
an additional copy called "F.EXE".

When you have finished running the installation program, delete the
following files from the installed disk to free up some space for your
program files:

        INSTALL.EXE
        EXTEND.BAT
        EXTENDH.BAT
        FMETA.BAT
        PFMETA.BAT
        KERNEL.COM
        KERNEL.CFG

These files are not useful on a system that has no room to re-build F-PC
anyway, so you might as well get rid of them as this will recover about
60k or so for you files.

You can run INSTALL.EXE again, and install the help  files on a second
floppy, but you will have to set your FPATH to include the other floppy
drive, and the directory into which the install program placed the help
files.  After this is done, they should be available by typing

        BROWSE  <wordname>  <enter>

You will probably find F-PC fairly difficult to learn in this limited
hardware environment, but its the best we can do.  Once you are familiar
with F-PC and do not need all the handholding, you will only need the
F-PC.EXE file on a floppy with your application files.  As F.EXE occupies
150K bytes of disk space, there are plenty of rooms for you to write
programs and try them on a single floppy disk.

